IBM_motivation.txt

The tight loop through the cerebellar cortex and the inferior olivary nucleus likely subserves the functions of motor coordination, sequence learning and precise timing, commonly ascribed to the olivo-cerebellar system.  

Inferior olivary cells are known to produce robust subthreshold membrane potential oscillations, which cause the cells to respond to stimuli in a phase dependent manner, both in latency and in response probabilities. Furthermore, strong electrotonic coupling of olivary cells is known to synchronize these subthreshold oscillations, which may provide the system with the means to coordinate and time neuronal populations during motor action. In the olivary network, coupling between neighboring cells leads to topographical propagations of membrane potential differences across cells, which results in the coupling of the response probabilities. Particularly, the coupling of cells is hypothesized to lead to the formation of isoprobability wavefronts, that is, and therefore, to a moving region of cells that are more likely to respond synchronously to perturbations — impulse like excitatory or inhibitory inputs occurring at different phases of the olivary oscillations. The variable propagation of wavefronts implies state-dependent directionality in the responses of olivary cells, which can putatively be observed as latencies in complex spikes of pairs of Purkinje cells.

It is therefore hypothesized that phase differences between coupled cells in the larger olivo-cerebellar network will lead to state dependent network responses, with predictable firing statistics. In the cerebellar cortex, given that Purkinje cells are innervated by individual olivary neurons, invariant phase differences of olivary cells’ subthreshold oscillations would translate into specific sequences of Purkinje cell firing. As such sequences are made state dependent due to the coupled subthreshold oscillations of olivary cells, this leads to predictable statistics of Purkinje cell firing, which can be measured as response latencies and probabilities.  
In experiments carried out in our lab, rhythmic entrainment of olivary cell populations has been demonstrated to occur, but due to empirical difficulties of simultaneously measuring subthreshold responses in large sets of cells, the hypothesized state-dependent isoprobability wavefronts within the olivary cell population and their related sequences of Purkinje cells activations have not been yet directly observed, though previous work implies their existence. Moreover, behavioral experiments on cerebellar mutants with altered olivary dynamics have demonstrated that coherence of olivary firing may be held accountable for the observed deficits in locomotion. We therefore propose to use a large scale model of the inferior olive to simulate the rhythmic entrainment of olivary cells, in order to predict the statistics of Purkinje cell responses when awake mice are exposed to periodic sensorimotor feedbacks. By emulating excitatory and inhibitory inputs to the olive that resemble feedbacks from motor and sensory systems, a model of the inferior olive may be able to produce the state dependent responses of olivary cells and the predicted sequences of activated Purkinje neurons in the cerebellar cortex. 

Particularly, by simulating the periodic feedbacks to the olive related to locomotion, we may be able to reproduce the firing rate statistics observed in Calcium imaging recording from Purkinje cells and multi-electrode recordings from olivary neurons, and thereby propose a mechanistic explanation of the observed deficits in sensorimotor function related to cerebellar disease. These model-based observations will lead to enticing hypotheses about olivo-cerebellar dynamics, and their role in sequence learning and multi-limb coordination.
